README.md, before:

PLLangVM
========
<b>Description:</b><br>
Programming langauge implementation and design final project with llvm!

<b>Team:</b><br>
Luke Metz<br>
Chris Lee<br>



Instructions for Compiling
===========================

Dependencies<br>
(1) LLVM  (llvc)<br>
(1) gcc (convert assembly generated by llvc to executable.)
(2) Python (os, sys)<br>

<b><i>Compiling</i></b><br>
Code that will be compiled is called test.plg; however, it is simply an argument passed into the command for compilation.

For Windows users, (plang.cmd)<br>
`plang [file] [-r to execute]`

For Linux users, <br>
`./plang [file]`

For OSX users, <br>
`Sorry.`


The Project
==========================
Programming langauge implementation and design final project with llvm using code from previous lectures.
<b>Project structure:</b><br>
<ul>
<li>build</li>
 llvm and c compilation outputs<br>
<li>src</li>
 SML back-end for our language. The bulk of this is from your functional
programming language. We are mainly working on compile-llvm.sml.<br>
<li>run.py</li>
 Python script that runs the compilation commands<br>
<li>run.sml</li>
 SML script that handles the input/output of the .plg script. <br>
<li>test.plg</li>
 Test code written in our plang language. <br>
 </ul>

<b>What we have implemented:</b><br>
Currently, we have basic mathematic operations implemented.<br>
We have a naive implementation of Let, single argument function declarations and function calling, and conditionals, multi argument functions via currying, closures, and first order functions.<br>
<br>
<h3> How it works </h3> </br>
<h4> Types </h4> </br>
The language we have implemented supports dynamic types. Currently we
only support 3 types, bools, integers, and functions. This limitation is
purely due to lack of time and avoidance of boring work.

These types are implemented via the %value type.
    %value = type {i8, i32*};
The first value, the `i8`, denotes the type of the `%value`. In our
code, 0 is a None type, 1 is an int type, 2 is a func type, and 3 is a
bool type. The second, `i32*`, is used to represent some pointer to some value, not necessarily a i32. For the case of a int, and boolean, the value is just a i32. For the function type however, it is a pointer to the %func_t type.
    %func_t = type {%value (%value*, %value) *, %value *}
This type has function pointer as well as a environment list.

In our code, all functions have a `%value (%value*, %value) syntax, Or a
function always returns a `%value`, and takes in a pointer to a `%value`
and a `%value`. The pointer to `%value`, the first argument, is the
environment. This is used only in closures that capture the environment.
This standardized api allows us to easily call both functions and
closures with similar syntax by just passing in a null pointer when an
environment is not needed.

<b> What doesn't work </b>
<b>Next Steps:</b><br>
Implement data types using llvm structures (hopefully, unions) with encoded type information. Our end goal in this respect is to have primitive dynamic type checking.<br>
Implement environments. These will be heap allocated structures that
contain pointers to what ever variables are in scope.
Finally, with this environment set up, we will implement closures and then currying. <br>

Commit message:

added memory management improvements draft

README.md, after:

PLLangVM
========
<b>Description:</b><br>
Programming langauge implementation and design final project with llvm!

<b>Team:</b><br>
Luke Metz<br>
Chris Lee<br>



Instructions for Compiling
===========================

Dependencies<br>
(1) LLVM  (llvc)<br>
(1) gcc (convert assembly generated by llvc to executable.)
(2) Python (os, sys)<br>

<b><i>Compiling</i></b><br>
Code that will be compiled is called test.plg; however, it is simply an argument passed into the command for compilation.

For Windows users, (plang.cmd)<br>
`plang [file] [-r to execute]`

For Linux users, <br>
`./plang [file]`

For OSX users, <br>
`Sorry.`


The Project
==========================
Programming langauge implementation and design final project with llvm using code from previous lectures.
<b>Project structure:</b><br>
<ul>
<li>build</li>
 llvm and c compilation outputs<br>
<li>src</li>
 SML back-end for our language. The bulk of this is from your functional
programming language. We are mainly working on compile-llvm.sml.<br>
<li>run.py</li>
 Python script that runs the compilation commands<br>
<li>run.sml</li>
 SML script that handles the input/output of the .plg script. <br>
<li>test.plg</li>
 Test code written in our plang language. <br>
 </ul>

<b>What we have implemented:</b><br>
Currently, we have basic mathematic operations implemented.<br>
We have a naive implementation of Let, single argument function declarations and function calling, and conditionals, multi argument functions via currying, closures, and first order functions.<br>
<br>
<h3> How it works </h3> </br>
<h4> Types </h4> </br>
The language we have implemented supports dynamic types. Currently we
only support 3 types, bools, integers, and functions. This limitation is
purely due to lack of time and avoidance of boring work.

These types are implemented via the %value type.
    %value = type {i8, i32*};

The first value, the `i8`, denotes the type of the `%value`. In our
code, 0 is a None type, 1 is an int type, 2 is a func type, and 3 is a
bool type. The second, `i32*`, is used to represent some pointer to some value, not necessarily a i32. For the case of a int, and boolean, the value is just a i32. For the function type however, it is a pointer to the %func_t type.
    %func_t = type {%value (%value*, %value) *, %value *}

This type has function pointer as well as a environment list.

In our code, all functions have a `%value (%value*, %value) syntax, Or a
function always returns a `%value`, and takes in a pointer to a `%value`
and a `%value`. The pointer to `%value`, the first argument, is the
environment. This is used only in closures that capture the environment.
This standardized api allows us to easily call both functions and
closures with similar syntax by just passing in a null pointer when an
environment is not needed.

<h3> Improvements </h3>
<h4>Memory Management</h4>
<h5> Leaks everywhere </h5>
Currently, our code leaks a lot. Everytime we create any `%value`, when
ever we do anything really, we allocate some memory on the heap and
never remove it. For a toy langauge, this doesn't really matter, but in
production this is unacceptable. LLVM supports basic garbage collection,
but we are not using this. In addition to this, many of our values can
avoid before we even get to garbage collection. Intermediate values for
example, ones that don't have any name accociated with them can simply
be freed once they are used.
<h5> Heap allocation </h5>
A huge slowdown in our code currently is the way we allocate memory.
Each time a `%value` is created, it is allocated on the heap via libc
`malloc`. `malloc` is quite bad at allocating small chunks of memory. We
also should be attempting to use stack allocated variables instead of
heap allocated ones. This will also give us a speed boost.

<b> Broken </b>
<b>Next Steps:</b><br>
Implement data types using llvm structures (hopefully, unions) with encoded type information. Our end goal in this respect is to have primitive dynamic type checking.<br>
Implement environments. These will be heap allocated structures that
contain pointers to what ever variables are in scope.
Finally, with this environment set up, we will implement closures and then currying. <br>
